Constructive Symmetry is an Aggregate Theory of Concrete Mathematics, which is a philosophy of math education with practical aspirations on the elementary (K-6) curriculum.

Currently, this repository contains several different media assets:

The theory track attempts to explain why the theory is the way it is, providing a preface and 10,000 foot overview of the larger theory. It's aimed at a "prosumer" mathematical audience: I try to keep things as simple as possible, but it's also moves quickly.

The theory track is intended to outline a course of study, not actually take you through that course of study.  These assets are intended to create referential knowledge in students, and intended to assist teachers in navigating the theory.

**T001** is [_Kevin Bacon and the Stern-Brocot Tree: a Sermon on Rational Approximation_](./T001_Kevin_Bacon_and_the_Stern-Brocot_Tree/a_Sermon_on_Rational_Approximation.md), an overview of symmetry and rational approximation,  both in the sense of John von Neumann and Herbert Simon, as well as Diophantus.  This project is intended to become a video.  I feel like the script is more-or-less complete. Work on the video has yet to begin.

**T002** is [_Tools of Math Construction: an Aggregate Theory of Concrete Mathematics_](./T002_Tools_of_Math_Construction/An_Aggregate_Theory_of_Concrete_Mathematics.md), the associated study guide.  It is quite long, it is semi-autobiographical, it is far from complete, but I hope it will be quite useful and interesting in its present form.  A big thank you to [Existential Comics](http://existentialcomics.com) and [XKCD](https://xkcd.com/) for the comics liberally infused into the study guide.

The remainder of the assets are intended to be part of an actual course of study.  These are all intended to become videos, and to be accessible to as broad an audience as possible, especially young children.

**A001** is [_A tour of the Stern-Brocot tree, a Museum of Fractions_](./A001_A_Tour_of_the_Museum_of_Fractions/A001_A_Tour_of_the_Stern-Brocot_tree__a_Museum_of_Fractions.md). This is an introduction to the Stern-Brocot tree. Currently, I have a script with detailed historical notes, a recording of my voice as an [audio track](A001_A_Tour_of_the_Museum_of_Fractions/A001_A_Tour_of_the_Stern-Brocot_tree__a_Museum_of_Fractions.flac), some [closed captions](A001_A_Tour_of_the_Museum_of_Fractions/A001_A_Tour_of_the_Stern-Brocot_tree__a_Museum_of_Fractions__CloseCaptions.txt), and an attempt at an [opening SVG graphic](./A001_A_Tour_of_the_Museum_of_Fractions/Museum_of_Fractions.svg).  I don't have the rest of the video available yet to go with the audio, and the historical notes should include more references to follow up on specific claims.

**A002** is [_The Euclidean Algorithm as a guidebook to the Museum: rebuilding fractions using the Stern-Brocot Tree_](./A002_The_Guidebook_to_the_Museum_of_Fractions/A002_The_Euclidean_Algorithm_as_the_Guidebook.md). This introduces connection between the Euclidean Algorithm and the Stern-Brocot tree.  We use the Euclidean Algorithm to first round 3.14 to 22/7, and then to finish reducing to least terms, 3.14 = 157/50. This popular approximation happens to be a shadowed semi-convergent of 𝜋. The script feels nearly workable, and historical notes are looking good.

**B001** is an introduction to Pascal's Triangle. This project is the least developed of the four. There's a very incomplete script in there.

**C001** is an introduction to the Symmetry Group of the Square.  _Kevin Bacon and the Stern-Brocot Tree_ happened to provide a very good start on a [script for this video](./C001_The_Square_Book_of_Algebra/C001_The_Symmetry_Group_of_the_Square__a_Book_of_Algebra.md).  I have a mechanical calculator and some worksheets ready to go, but unfortunately I've misplaced those files for the time being.  Those files will be located, or recreated.  In the meantime, if you want to get a taste for what the calculator for the symmetry group of the square looks like,  I've included a [pdf calculator for the symmetry group of the hexagon](./C001_The_Square_Book_of_Algebra/d6.pdf) instead.